# mindstorms

## foreword

#### vii
> Slowly I began to formulate what I still consider the fundamental fact about learning: Anything is easy if you can assimilate it to yout collection of models. If you can't, anything can be painfully difficult. Here too I was developint a way of thinking that would be resonant with Piaget's. _The understanding of learning must be genetic_. It must refer to the genesis of knowledge. Whta an individual can learn, and how he learns it, depends on what models he has available. This raises, recursively, the question of how he learned these models. Thus the "laws of learning" must be about how intellectual structures grow out of one another and about how, in the process, they acquire both logical and emotional form.

### Transitional object
#### viii
> As well as connecting with teh formal knowledge of mathematics, it also connects with the "body of knowledge", the sensorimotor schemata of a child. You can _be_ the gear, you can understand how it turns by projecting yourself into its place and turning with it. It is this double relationship - both abstract and sensory - that gives the gear the power to carry powerful mathematics into the mind. In a terminology I shall develop in later chapters, the gear acts here as a _transitional object_.

#### 3
> This book too poses the question of what will be done with personal computers, but in a very different way. I shall be talking about how computers may affect the way people think and learn.

#### 4 - 5
> In this book I discuss ways in which the computer presence could contribute to mental processes not only instrumentally but in more essential, conceptual ways, influencing how poeple think even when they are far removed from physical contact with a computer (just as the gears shaped my understanding of algebra although they were not physically present in the math class). It is about an end to the culture that makes science and technology alien to the vast majority of people. Many cultural barriers impede children from making scientific knowledge their own. Among these barriers the most visible are the physically brutal effects of deprivation and isolation. Other barriers are more political. Many children who grow up in our cities are surrounded by the artifacts of science but have good reason to see htem as belonging to "the others";

...

> This book is about how computers can ve carriers of powerful ideas and of the seeds of cultural change, how they can help people form new relationships with knowledge that cut across the traditional lines separating humanities from sciences and knowledge of the self from both of these. It is about using computers to challenge current beliefs about who can understand what and at what age. It is about using computers to question standard assumptions in developmental psychology and in the psychology of aptitudes and attitudes. It is about whether personal computers and the cultures in which they are used will continue to be the creatures of "engineers" alone or whether we can construct intellectual environments in which people who today think of themselves as "humanists" will feel part of, not alienated from, the process of constructing computational cultures.

> But there is a world of difference between what computers can do and what society will choose to do with them. Society has many ways to resist fundamental and threatening change. Thus, this book is about facing choices that are ultimately political. It looks at some of the forces of change and of reaction to those forces that are called into play as the computer presence begins to enter the politically charged world of education.

#### 5
> In many schools today, the phrase "computer-aided instruction" means making the computer teach the child. One might say the _computer is being used to program_ the child. In my vision, _the child programs the computer_ and, in doing so, both acquires a sense of mastery of a piece of the most modern and powerful technology and establishes an intimate contact with some of the deepest ideas from science, from mathematics, and from the art of intellectual model building.

#### 6
> Programming a computer means nothing more or less than communicating to it in a language that it and the human user can both "understand". And learning languages is one of the things children do best. Every normal child learns to talk. Why then should a child not learn to "talk" to a computer?

...

> Two fundamental ideas run through this book. The first is that it is possible to design computers so that learning to communicate with them can be a natural process, more like learning French by living in France than like trying to learn it through the unnatural process of American foreign-language instruction in classrooms. Second, learning to communicate with a computer may change the way other learning takes place. The computer can be a mathematics-speaking and an alphabetic-speaking entity. We are learning how to make computers with which children love to communicate. When this communication occurs, children learn mathematics as a living language. Moreover, mathematical communication and alphabetic communication are thereby both transformed from the alien and therefore difficult things they are for most children into natural and therefore easy ones. The idea of "talking mathematics" to a computer can be generalized to a view of learning mathematics in "Mathland"; that is to say, in a context which is to learning mathematics what living in France is to learning French.

#### 7 - 8
> I take from Jean Piaget a model of children as builders of their own intellectual structures. Children seem to be innately gifted learners, acquiring long before they go to school a vast quantity of knowledge by a process I call "Piagetian learning", or "learning without being taught". For example, children learn to speak, learn the intuitive geometry needed to get around in space, and learn enough of logic and rhetorics to get around parents - all this without being "taught". We must ask why some learning takes place so early and spontaneously while some is delayed many years or does not happen at all without deliberately imposed formal instruction.

> If we really look at the "child as builder" we are on our way to an answer. All builders need materials to build with. Where I am at variance with Piaget is in the role I attribute to the surrounding cultures as a source  of these materials. In some cases the culture supplies them in abundance, thus facilitating constructive Piagetian learning. For example, the fact that so many importantn things (knives and forks, mothers and fathers, shoes and socks) come in pairs is a "material" for the construction of an intuitive sense of number. But in many cases where Piaget would explain the slower development of a particular concept by its greater complexity or formality, I see the critical factor as the relative poverty of the culture in those materials that would make the concept simple and concrete. In yet other cases the culture may provide materials but block their use. In the case of formal mathematics, there is both a shortage of formal materials and a cultural block as well. In the case of formal mathematics, there is both a shortage of formal materials and a cultural block as well. The mathophobia endemic in contemporary culture blocks many people from learning anything they recognize as "math", although they may have no trouble with mathematical knowledge they do not perceive as such.

> We shall see again and again that the conseguences of mathophobia go far beyond obstructing the learning of mathematics and science. They interact with other endemic "cultural toxins", for example, with popular theories of aptitudes, to contaminate peoples' images of themselves as learners. Difficulty with school math is often the first step of an invasive intellectual process that leads us all to define ourselves as bundles of aptitudes and ineptitudes, as being "mathematical" or "not mathematical", "artistic" or "not artistic", "musical" or "not musical", "profound" or "superficial", "intelligent" or "dumb". Thus deficiency becomes identity and learning is transformed from the early child's free exploration of the world to a chore beset by insecurities and self-imposed restrictions.


#### 8 
> Two major themes - that children can learn to use computers in a masterful way, and that learning to use computers can change the way they learn everything else - have shaped my research agenda on computers and education.

#### 8 
> The metaphot of imitating the way the child learns to talk has been constantly with us in this work and has led to a vision of education and of education research very different from the traditional ones.

#### 9
> I believe that the computer presence will enable us to so modify the learning environment outside the classrooms that much if not all the knowledge schools presently try to teach with such pain and expense and such limited success will be learned, as the child learns to talk, painlessly, successfully, and without organized instruction. This obviously implies that schools as we know them today will have no place in the future. But it is an open question whether they will adapt by transforming themselves into something new or wither away and be replaced.

#### 10
> When I trace how I came to be a mathematician, I see much taht was idiosyncratic, much that could not be duplicated as part of a generalized vision of education reform. And I certainly don't think that we would want everyone to become a mathematician. But I think that the kind of pleasure I take in mathematics should be part of a general vision of what education should be about. If we can grasp the essence of one person's experiences, we may be able to replicate its consequences in other ways, and in particular this consequence of finding beauty in abstract things.

#### 11
> I could use my body to think about the gears. I could feel how gears turn by imagining by body turning. This made it possible for me to draw on my "body knowledge" to think about gear systems. And finally, because, in a very real sense, the relationship between gears contain a great deal of mathematical information, I could use the gears to think about formal systems. I have described the way in which the gears served as an "object-to-think-with".

...

> The central role of the Turtle in this book should not be taken to mean that I propose it as a panacea for all educational problems. I see it as a valuable educational object, but its principal role here is to serve as a model for other objects, yet to be invented. My interest is in the process of invention of "objects-to-think-with", objects in which there is an intersection of cultural presence, embedded knowledge, and the possibility for personal identification.

### TURTLE
#### 11 - 12
> The Turtle is a computer-controlled sybernetic animal. It exists within the cognitive minicultures of the "LOGO environment", LOGO being the computer language in which communication with the Turtle takes place. The Turtle serves no other purpose than of being good to program and good to think with. Some Turtles are abstract objects that live on computer screens. Others, like the floor Turtles shown in ther frontispiece are physical objects that can be picked up like any mechanical toy. A first encounter often begins by showing the child how a Turtle can be made to move by typing commands at a keyboard. FORWARD 100 makes the Turtle move in a straight line a distance of 100 Turtle steps of about a millimeter each. Typing RIGHT 90 causes the Turtle to pivot in place through 90 degrees. Typing PENDOWN causes the Turtle to lower a pen so as to leave a visible trace of its path while PENUP instructs it to raise the pen. Of course the child needs to explore a great deal before gaining mastery of what the numbers mean. But the task is engaging enough to carry most children through this learning process.

> The idea of programming is introduced through the metaphor of teaching the Turtle a new word. This is simply done, and children often begin their programming experience by programming the Turtle to respond to new commands invented by the child such as SQUARE or TRIANGLE or SQ or TRI or whatever the child wished, by drawing the appropriate shapes. New commands once defined can be used to define others. For example just as the house in Figure 1 is built out of a triangle and a square, the program for drawinf it is built out of the commands for drawing a square and a triangle. Figure 1 shows four steps in the evolution of this program. From these simple drawings the young programmer can go on in many different directions. Some work on more complex drawings, either figural or abstract. Some abandon the use of the Turtle as a drawing instrument and learn to use its touch sensors to program it to seek out or avoid objects. Later children learn that the computer can be programmed to make music as well as move Turtles and combine the two activities by programming Turtles to dance. Or they can move on from floor Turtles to "screen Turtles", which they program to draw moving pictures in bright colors. The examples are infinitely varied, but in each the child is learning how to exercise control over an exceptionally rich and sophisticated "micro-world".

#### 13
> That all this would be fun needs no argument. But it is more than fun. Very powerful kinds of learning are taking place. Children working with an electronic sketchpad are learning a language for talking about shapes and fluxes of shapes, about velocities and rates of change, about processes and procedures. They are learning to speak mathematics, and acquiring a new image of themselves as mathematicians.

#### 19 - 20
> In most contemporary educational situations where children come into contact with computers the computer is used to put children through their paces, to provide exercises of an appropriate level of difficulty, to provide feedback, and to dispense information. The computer programming the child. In the LOGO environment the relationship is reversed: The child, even at preschool ages, is in control: The child programs the computer. And in teaching the computer how to think, children embark on an exploration about how they themselves think. The experience can be heady: Thinking about thinking turns the child into an epistemologist, an experience not even shared by most adults.

> This powerful image of child as epistemologist caught my imagination while I was working with Piaget. In 1964, after five years at Piaget's Center for Genetic epistemology in Geneva, I came away impressed by his way of looking at children as the active builders of their own intellectual structures. But to saya that intellectual structures are built by the learner rather than taught by a teacher does not mean that they are built from nothing. On the contrary: Like other builders, children appropriate to their own use materials they find about them, most saliently the models and metaphors suggested by the surrounding culture.

> Piaget writes about the order in which the child develops different intellectual abilities. I give more weight than he does to the influence of the materials a particular culture provides in determining that order. For example, our culture is very rich in materials useful for the child's construction of certain components of numericals and logical thinking. Children learn to count; they learn that the result of counting is independent of order and special arrangement; they extend this "conservation" to thinking about the properties of liquids as they are poured and of solids which change their shape. Children develop these components of thinking preconsciously and "spontaneously", that is to say, without deliberate teaching. Other components of knowledge, such as the skills involved in doing permutations and combinations, develop more slowly, or do not develop at all without formal schooling. Taken as a whole this book is an argument that in many important cases this developmental difference can be attributed to our culture's relative poverty in materials from which the apparently "more advanced" intellectual structures can be built. This argument will be very different from cultural interpretations of Piaget that look for differences between city children in Europe or the United States and tribal children in African jungles. When I speak here of "our" culture I mean something less parochial. I am not trying to contrast New York with Chad. I am interested in the difference between precomputer cultures (whether in American cities or African tribes) and the "computer cultures" that may develop everywhere in the next decades.

> I have already indicated one reason for my belief that the computer presence might have more fundamental effects on intellectual development than did other new technologies, including television and even printing. The metaphor of computer as mathematics-speaking entity puts the learnerin a qualitatively new kind of relationship to an important domain of knowledge. Even the best of educational television is limited to offering quantitative improvements in the kinds of learning that existed without it. "Sesame Street"